HR Analytics: Employee Attrition & Performance

This project focuses on analyzing employee data to identify patterns and factors contributing to attrition in an organization. It includes data cleaning, visualization, and actionable insights to help organizations improve employee retention.

Features

Data Cleaning:
Preprocessing the dataset by handling missing values and irrelevant columns for accurate analysis.
Data Visualization:
Graphical representation of insights, including:
Bar graphs to analyze department-wise attrition.
Heatmaps to show correlations between features like income, job satisfaction, and attrition.
Pie charts to represent overall attrition vs. retention rates.
Insights and Solutions:
Highlighted key factors such as frequent travel, overtime, and low job satisfaction influencing employee attrition.
Suggested solutions like improving work-life balance, optimizing salaries, and enhancing employee engagement.
Workflow:
Step 1: Data Collection & Cleaning
Step 2: Visualization of Trends & Patterns
Step 3: Insights Derivation & Solution Recommendations
Technologies Used

Python: For data analysis and visualization.
Libraries:
Pandas: Data cleaning and manipulation.
Matplotlib & Seaborn: Data visualization.
How to Run the Project

Clone the repository or download the project files.
Open the Jupyter Notebook (.ipynb) file.
Ensure all required Python libraries are installed:
pip install pandas matplotlib seaborn
Run each cell sequentially to load the dataset, clean data, and generate visualizations.
Dataset

The dataset contains the following columns:

Age, JobRole, Department, MonthlyIncome, JobSatisfaction, OverTime, Attrition, etc.
Unused columns have been removed during preprocessing to focus on key attributes.

Conclusion

The project identifies critical factors affecting employee attrition and provides actionable recommendations for improving retention. The visualizations make it easier to interpret trends and implement effective strategies.

